Jehovah's Witnesses is a group of people that believe the Bible, however they reject essential Christian doctrines. We hope to disprove JW as a Christian Denomination. We also hope to prove that Jehovah's Witness is not doctrinally sound and is not biblically saved. We will use the Bible to disprove Jehovah's Witnesses.

We will start our evidence by proving that Jesus Christ is God in human form. The Bible states that Jesus Christ is God in many different verses for example the verse John 10:30 "I and the Father are one." This clearly proves that Jesus Christ is God because the Father is God. Another verse that proves Jesus Christ is God is John 5:18 "This was why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God." This verse says that Jesus was making himself equal with God, now we can use scholasticism to prove that Jesus is God through this verse. No one can be equal with God except God himself, Since the Bible says that Jesus claims to be equal with God and since Jesus can't lie because Jesus is sinless, that would mean that Jesus is God as well. Both of these verses are the same in the New World Translation, however the New World Translation is not that innocent.

The New World Translation changes Bible verses to fit the Bible into there own agenda. You can find differences from the ESV to the New World Translation in almost every verse during John 1:1-20 but I will list the important changes and why the changes in the New World Translation are wrong. The First change you can see is in John 1:1. The New World Translation says " In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god." The ESV says "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." The ESV is correct, the reason it is correct has everything to do with the original Koine Greek. This is the Koine Greek( καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος.) that explicitly transliterates to "[and-καὶ] [God-θεὸς] [was-ἦν] [the-ὁ] [Word.-λόγος.]" This change in The New World Translation is wrong because the Greek does not transliterate to "and the Word was a god. "The New World Translation tries to change the transliteration to help their case that Jesus is not God. The next change you see is in verse 14. The ESV says "And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth." The New World Translation says "So the Word became fleshs and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor and truth." The Koine Greek ("Καὶ ὁ λόγος σὰρξ ἐγένετο καὶ ἐσκήνωσεν ἐν ἡμῖν, καὶ ἐθεασάμεθα τὴν δόξαν αὐτοῦ, δόξαν ὡς μονογενοῦς παρὰ πατρός, πλήρης χάριτος καὶ ἀληθείας.) has a completely different meaning from the New World Translation. The Koine Greek transliterates to "And the Word flesh became and dwelt among us an we beheld the glory of Him a glory as of an only begotten from [the] Father full of grace and truth." That transliteration makes the ESV the correct translation again. The New World Translation is wrong because it changes The Father and The Son to just a random father and his son taking away the from the trinity aspect of John 1:1-20 to fit their own agenda. This is a common theme where the New World Translation will change the transliteration of the Greek to English to fit there agenda. You can find this in more verses. One last note I would like to add to my point of the New World Translation being a corrupted translation is that even scholars that aren't Christian or JW say that the New World Translation is a bad translation of the Bible.

Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the word Sheol in Hebrew simply refers to a grave they will deny that Hell is a real place of eternal suffering. This is easily refuted by Matthew 13:40-42 which says "[40] Just as the weeds are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at the end of the age. [41] The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all causes of sin and all law-breakers, [42] and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth." In these verses it clearly talks about Hell but according to Jehovah's Witnesses this place is just a grave in which people are unconscious and feel no pain. However in verse 42 it gives Hell these characteristics of weeping and gnashing of teeth this implies that this grave would be painful so this is in total contradiction to the Jehovah's witnesses version of Hell. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the punishment of sin is death, now that is true but they don't take into account the other verses such as Revelation 21:8 " [8] But as for the cowardly, the faithless, the detestable, as for murderers, the sexually immoral, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.” This second death that the Bible talks about is clearly Hell considering Matthew 23:40-42 and Romans 6:23. According to the JW official website "The idea of eternal torment is repugnant to God" and the evidence listed of this being true is them saying that God is love according to 1 John 4:8 and Matthew 22:36-38, but we must remember that the people that go to Hell even to Jehovah's Witnesses are people that didn't except Jesus as their Lord and Savior. When people don't except Jesus as their Lord that means they reject God's gift of salvation, which means they are enemies of God because of their sin that they didn't get forgiven of.

With all of this evidence we can now say for certain that Jehovah's Witness is not Christian because they defy what the Bible says. To be a Christian you must believe in at least one of the Following Creeds (Nicene Creed, Athanasian Creed, and Apostles' Creed) you cannot be a Christian and reject all of these Creeds because if you reject them all then you reject the Bible as truth and you reject essential Christian doctrine. If you reject the Bible and these Christian doctrines as truth then you don't believe in the Christian God.